Create ai_policy.md (#24)
AcademySoftwareFoundation/rmtc: tsc/process/ai_policy.md

# Draft AI Policy for RMTC

March 27 2026
 
The following document details the policies and procedures relating to responsible usage of AI in the development of RMTC.
 
## Context
 
RMTC is a provenance project developed with the intention of helping to protect creative rights in AI VFX pipelines - as a consequence, usage of AI code generation solutions to submit code to RMTC has to be undertaken with careful consideration. Rather than banning the use of such tools, and inviting undocumented and untraced adoption; we wish to create a policy around AI generative code. The policy aims to provide a framework for provenance and tracing at the development level - a goal inline with the aims of the project.
 
## Principles
 
- Human - someone is always in the loop
- Disclose - disclosure of AI use, where and how
- Responsibility - submitter takes full responsibility for PR in alignment with CLA
- Community - keep projects thriving, populated by people
- Graduated - phased adoption of AI
 
## Human in the loop
 
Regardless of how the code was created - only humans can submit PRs. Only humans can review PRs. Obly humans can commit them to the repository.
 

> A human is required.

Reviewer: A human should understand what is in the code and how it works (avoid pure vibe coding).
There should be a trail of involvement of a human in the development - specifications, plans, slack discussions.

Reviewer: Updates to issues as an example of involment

> PRs generated without an identifiable human author will be immediately closed and the source account banned from the project.

Reviewer: Banned is possibly too strong, soften the terms, give a warning potentially, hold the PR back for further review. "We reserve the right to ban accounts if repeated or egregious violation on a case by case basis".

Apply to any violation not just AI policy.

Reword to assume good intent?

 
## Disclosure
 

> If AI was used, it is *mandatory* that the commit must disclose via 'Assisted-by' followed by the tool used and a brief description of what it was used for:

Reviewer: Commit hooks to check for format - possibly validate model names.
Consider any use of AI even if not generative?
Mandatory to disclose if artifact makes it into repo, optional disclosure if use of AI for introspection or non generative tasks.

> ```Assisted-by: anthropic-claude-connet-4.6 - Generated tests for Model input processing```

Reviewer: Sonnet not connect

 
Not understanding the contents and deferring to AI is no defense for possible infringement. Avoid pure generative code - each line must be understood by the contributor and there ideally will be demonstrative evidence of that during discussion, or via supportive material (specifications or documentation).
 
## Community
 
Though you may use generative AI to generate code for your PR, you may not use agents or AI to communicate with the community or act on your behalf anonymously. You may not use agents or AI to submit the PR. This is to ensure we keep high levels of community engagement, to keep the quality level high for PRs and discourse and to keep the volume of PRs down to a manageable throughput for our reviewers.
 
First time issues for the project are not to be resolved using AI - they are for learning the project and are intended for education of new contributors. AI generated PRs for first time issues will be immediately closed.
 
## Graduated adoption
 

> RMTC is an early stage project - it's code and community examples not yet established enough to allow for an AI to generate complementary code. Additionally, it is not clear regarding the possibility for reconstruction of license violating material for burgenoning projects which poses a specific issue for RMTC due to it's aims for responsible AI usage.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
RMTC is an early stage project - its code and community examples not yet established enough to allow for an AI to generate complementary code. Additionally, it is not clear regarding the possibility for reconstruction of license violating material for burgenoning projects which poses a specific issue for RMTC due to its aims for responsible AI usage.
```

> RMTC is an early stage project - it's code and community examples not yet established enough to allow for an AI to generate complementary code. Additionally, it is not clear regarding the possibility for reconstruction of license violating material for burgenoning projects which poses a specific issue for RMTC due to it's aims for responsible AI usage.

Reviewer: Phase 2-5 a little fine grained, maybe make more general - what is 'minor' vs 'major'?

Consider difference between policy and application - case by case?
Important for gradual adoption for greenfield project.
A little control is good.
These are intended to guide our AI usage not hard rules

Consider in Phase 1

 
* Phase 0: No generative usage - limited to discovery and review
* Phase 1: AI use limited in scope to secondary artifacts - testing, documentation
* Phase 2: Minor bug fixes (below 100lines)
* Phase 3: Major bug fixes, minor features (below 1000lines)
* Phase 4: Major features (above 1000lines)
* Phase 5: Sub system Refactoring
 
Shifting from one phase to another requires a majority vote by the TSC.
 
## Asset Generation
 
Asset generation of any kind ouside of text is banned - images, meshes, audio or any other kind of artistic asset. This is in direct contravention of the artist centric positioning of RMTC and is not required for the development of the platform.
 
## AI usage definition
 

> AI has been used for sometime in software development, from code suggestions to spell checking. What does this policy cover?

Reviewer 2: 'some time' is a period of time; 'sometime' is a specific point in time

```suggestion
AI has been used for some time in software development, from code suggestions to spell checking. What does this policy cover?
```

 
### Examples of AI use (not exhaustive)
 
- AI generated source code, documentation, binaries, or text that is then included in a PR
- AI generated assets such as mesh, audio, video and images
- Agentic AI that act on behalf of a user
- LLMs or other modern statistical inference systems
- Derivatives of AI use - e.g. a generated image manipulated by hand, source code that is edited by a human
 
### Exclusions
 
- Using it to query, summarise or review the code but not generate an artifact for PR
- Spell checking

> - Traditional line code completion (<10lines)

Reviewer: Remove lines reference - remove line counts as too arbitrary
